# Embracing Experiments

I used to experiment on my co-workers. I was in my early adulthood and I was working part-time at the nicest strip-mall salon you could imagine. For a person who didn’t have any extended family located in the same city, I loved having coworkers who I looked up to like they were my aunts and a customer base that were essentially grannies coming in to get their weekly hair-dos for the weekend. The first year or so was obtaining mastery in my role - my brain was challenged enough by that that I was suitably entertained. The second year, though, things shifted. I could do all my tasks on just a few hours of dehydrated sleep (ah, youth) and I was ready for other challenges. I suppose looking back now I recognize that I was demonstrating an interest in process improvement although I certainly wouldn’t have called it that. Instead, I was seeking to be helpful.

The salon was busy and time was definitely equal to money for them. As long as customers were happy, the more people they could serve in a day, the more money for their pockets. For all of the tasks the stylists had to do, I had spent that first year observing how they were currently operating and then in year two my brain started to suggest improvements. Thankfully, they were permissive with a certain level of autonomy for me to explore ideas and were always ok with me reorganizing the shop while seeking to improve efficiency. And for the most part, it worked. It helped that the scope of the changes I might make weren’t more than an hour or two of effort and always undo-able. ([Amazon knows a few things](https://aws.amazon.com/executive-insights/content/how-amazon-defines-and-operationalizes-a-day-1-culture/) then search the page for “two-way door”)

It would be 20 years more before I actively, knowingly, started running experiments on myself and my life.

[The Game Changers](https://gamechangersmovie.com/) came out in 2018. It’s a documentary about athletes who follow plant-based diets and provides some approximations of science as to why you might want to opt in for improved performance. I like documentaries and this one made me stop and think. I was curious about the results the participants were claiming and thought that it might be fun to replicate that on myself. So I decided that for two weeks, I’d see what it was like to be vegan. Two weeks felt like a long enough time but wouldn’t require so much effort that my determination would peter out. I knew I’d have to spend a bit of money on ingredients but that would happen regardless - a person needs to eat.

So for two weeks I ate a variety of plants. And I felt great. I was surprised and intrigued but went back to my omnivore ways because steak. Skip ahead a few years, and I wasn’t feeling so great. Low energy, lots of meh and I remembered that two weeks when I had felt nigh on invincible.

I’m a scientist. Yah, whatever, computers count, I'm fine with it. My point is that I know that just because your experiment works once that it means nothing. A QA lifetime of trying to demonstrate bugs to coworkers has taught me the importance of reproducible results. So I decided to run the experiment again. This time for a month. So I dug up some old recipes and found some new ones and figured out how I was going to make this work for 31 days. It wasn’t completely sound - turns out your white sugar might have bone char in it and I’m not entirely sure they gave me the plant-based patty in my takeout burger like I asked - but I felt that it was a close enough rerun that I should be able to evaluate another data point on veganism as a tactic for health.

At the conclusion of that cold January, I wasn’t seeing the improvements I had previously seen and that was disappointing. But I did discover something completely unexpected. I liked running experiments on my life. We tend to operate as we have the day, week, year, and decade before. People don’t generally embrace change. It requires effort. But people will often exert energy for something they are interested in for a set amount of time. That’s the key: time limits. Change isn't so horrible for short amounts of time. So I started running other month-long experiments. I’d look at what hadn’t been going well over the past months or year and then frame an experiment to run to see if I could affect the positive change I wanted in my life.

Some of them were around physical exercise, some of them were around financial decisions, a lot of them involved food, and a few of them came with surprising results. For example, Salad September certainly meant I was eating more veggies every day but I wasn’t expecting that having to plan my meals to ensure I was eating a salad every day meant that I would save 50% of my allotted food budget for the month. I wasn’t expecting meal planning to have such a high impact on my bottom line. I went back to not eating salads every day but I kept the planning and the associated cost-savings. Sometimes you’ll run an experiment and validate your hypothesis. Sometimes you won’t and it’s back to the drawing board. But sometimes you’ll come up with something that was completely unexpected and of huge value.

And I’ve brought that sense of experimentation back into my work life. When I’m observing something not as great as it should be, I seek to define an experiment where I can test out an idea, measure the results and learn. And sometimes my ideas work out and sometimes they don’t. But since I’ve limited the time and effort required to prove or disprove my idea, it’s ok either way. What’s more important is that I’m seeking to make things better, I’m testing out low effort ideas on important questions that I have, and I’m learning during the journey. What's more, it's easier to get buy-in from my colleagues if they know that a change will only be a few days or weeks. They are more willing to join in on the experiment, knowing that if it doesn't pan out, they can revert back to the old way of doing things.

So the next time you want to change something, ask yourself what’s a tiny experiment you (and those around you) would be willing to commit to. Identify some things you might be able to measure during the experiment and at the end, sum up the results:
- What went well?
- What didn’t go well?
- What was surprising?
- What could we change up for the next experiment?

You can definitely borrow my lab coat.
